# Real-Time-Patient-Vitals-Monitoring-System
“Real Time Patient Vitals Monitoring System” is a data engineer project designed and implemented using a Medallion Data Architecture with the purpose of building a system that simulates patient vitals such as heart rate, oxygen saturation, temperature, and respiratory rate using statistical principles for reliable and unbiased dataset.
The generated data is continuously streamed and processed through layered architecture, which includes Bronze Layer (stores incoming data in raw format), Silver Layer (ensures data cleaning and validation), and Gold Layer (provides final data set to work on, such as patient status and alerts). The system is designed to classify patients into three categories: normal, warning, and critical, using a rule-based threshold. Also, anomaly detection is implemented using the isolation forest algorithm, in case any unusual patterns are identified.
The live data is then used for developing a real time interactive dashboard using the streamlit framework for providing insights and interface for monitoring patient vital data. The dashboard allows to observe patient conditions dynamically as live data is being processed. Dashboard carries charts, tables, and summary matrix for health parameters such as heart rate, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and body temperature. These visualisations help with identifying trends patterns and sudden changes in vitals overtime. Dashboard also supports near real time updates. By continuously refreshing our Intervals This also improves responsiveness and helps in taking required actions faster.
During the development of monitoring system, a few technical hurdles occurred, which also impacted the process of analysing and visualising data. Trying to process everything all at once, created some bottlenecks because of massive data set, which slowed down the implementation process and made framework crash outs. In order to tackle this batch processing was used that is breaking data into smaller chunks which made implementation smooth and memory management easier. Threshold values were also refined for better realistic medical ranges which helped with boosting accuracy. For ensuring chronological accuracy in data representation timestamp parsing and sorting techniques were used before visualisation.
In this project, I have tried to implement the modern data engineering techniques in the domain of Healthcare Analytics, it demonstrates how the real time processing, a layered pipeline set up and smart analytics can work together to support pattern medical outcomes. This system hands healthcare professional’s actionable knowledge to step in when it counts. Further connecting it with Iot devices instead of generated data would allow live analysis with real data. Also, if deployment is shifted to the cloud, it will have access to better speed, flexibility and scalability, also, advanced machine learning models would take analytics even deeper, spotting critical patterns and detecting anomalies more reliable. And perhaps even before the warning signs become obvious.
